---
layout: post
title: Nonsense and Logical Fallicies
categories: Logic
description: logic
keywords: logic
---
A description of patterns that seem to characterize the ways that people tend to respond and think
1. tend to believe what they what to believe.
2. tend to project their own biases or experiences upon situations
3. tend to generalized from specific event.
4. tend to get personally involved in the analysis of an issue and tend to let their feelings overcome a sense of objectivity.
5. are not good listeners. They hear selectively. They often hear only what they want to hear.
6. are eager to rationalize.
7. are often unable to distinguish what is relevant from what is irrelevant.
8. are easily diverted from specific issue at hand.
9. are usually unwilling to explore thoroughly the ramifications of  a topic; tend to oversimplify.
10. often judge from appearances. They oberve something, misinterpret what they observe, and make terrible errors in judgement.
11. often simply don't know what they are talking about, especially in matters of general discussion. They rarely think carefully before they speak, but they allow their feelings, prejudices, biases, likes, dislikes, hopes, and frustrations to supersede careful thinking.
12. rarely act according to a set of consistent standard. Rarely do they examine the evindence and then form a conclusion. Rather, they tend to do whatever they want to do and to believe whatever they want to believe and then find whatever evidence will support their actons or their beliefs. They often think selectively: in evaluating  a situation they are eager to find reasons to support what they want to support and they are just as eager to ignore or disregard reasons that don't support what they want.
13. often do not say what they mean and often do not mean what they say.
