---
layout: post
title: Oxford introductions
categories: philosophy
description: philosophy
keywords: philosophy
---

### Political Philosophy
#### Why do we need political philosophy
> The answer I want to give is that the agenda of political philosophy changes as society and  government change, although some items have stayed on it as far back as our records go. Among these perennial questions are basis questions about politics and political authority that I shall be addressing in the next. Why do we need politics in the first place? What right has anybody to force another person to do something against theire will? Why should I obey the law when it does not suit me to? But in other cases, either the questions, or the answers, or both, have changed over time, and we need to see why this is so. 

> For many centuries beforehand, the opposite view prevailed: good government meant government by a wise monarch, or an enlightened aristocracy, or men of property, or perhaps some combination of these. So are we right and our predecessors simply wrong? No, because democracy seems to need certain preconditions to function successfully: it needs a wealthy and literate population, media of mass communication so that ideas and opinions can circulate freely, a well-functioning legal system that commands people’s respect, and so forth. And these conditions did not obtain anywhere until the fairly recent past, nor could they be created overnight (classical Athens is often held up as an exception, but it is important to remember that Athenian ‘democracy’ encompassed only a minority of the city’s population, and rested, as the Greeks themselves recognized, on the work of women, slaves, and resident aliens). So the older philosophers were not wrong to dismiss democracy as a form of government. Even Rousseau, who as we saw earlier was an influential source of democratic ideas, said that it was suitable only for gods and not for men. Given the prevailing conditions, democracy as we understand it today was not a viable form of government. 

> For another example of the shifting agenda of political philosophy, consider the value we attach today to personal choice. We think people should be free to choose their jobs, their partners, their religious beliefs, the clothes they wear, the music they listen to, and so on and so forth. It is important, we think, that each person should discover or invent the style of life that suits them best. But how much sense would this make in a society where most people, in order to stay alive, are bound to follow in their parents’ footsteps, with little choice of occupation, few entertainments, a common religion, and so on? Here other values become much more important. And this is how societies have been for most of human history, so it is hardly surprising that only in the last couple of centuries do we find political philosophies built around the supreme value of personal choice, such as John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty.

> **My aim is to explain what is at issue when anarchists argue with statists, democrats argue with elitists, liberals argue with authoritarians, nationalists argue with cosmopolitans, and so on, but it would be disingenuous to claim that I am surveying these debates from some entirely neutral, Olympian perspective. One cannot write about political philosophy without doing it as well. So although I have tried not to browbeat the reader into thinking that there is only one plausible answer to some of the most fiercely contested questions of our time, I have not attempted to disguise my sympathies either. Where you disagree with me, I hope you will find the reasons on your side of the argument fairly presented. Of course, I hope even more that you will be convinced by the reasons on my side.**

#### Democracy
>Should we worry about the fact that our democracy remains incomplete so long as the political role of ordinary citizens is largely confined to voting at elections, plus intermittent activity when some particular interest of theirs is at stake (such as responding to a planning proposal to put a new road or housing development in their back yard)? I think we should. Our word ‘idiot’ comes from the Greek idiotes which was the term used to describe someone who lived an entirely private existence and took no part in the public life of the city. Most of us today are idiots, then, inasmuch as we fail to exercise our political intelligence. Rousseau thought that handing over political authority entirely to elected representatives was a pernicious modern practice: *The people of England deceive themselves when they fancy they are free; they are so, in fact, only during the election of members of parliament: for, as soon as a new one is elected, they are again in chains, and are nothing. And thus, by the use they make of their brief moments of liberty, they deserve to lose it.*

> Democracy, it turns out, is a demanding business. It requires people to take an interest in political issues that are often complex and seemingly remote from their daily lives, and it requires them to exercise self-restraint when deciding these issues – in particular by not trampling on minority groups even when they have the power to do so. It can be hard to resist the siren voices that tell us that we are better off leaving political decisions to those we have chosen to represent us. But unless we resist – unless we hold fast to the idea that political authority must finally rest with the whole body of citizens – we will end up, as Locke warned, being devoured by the lions who rule us.

> This discussion of democracy has also raised three further issues: One is whether there is a sphere of personal freedom that should be protected against the intrusion even of democratic government. Another is whether some minority groups should be given special rights, over and above the constitutional rights that all citizens should enjoy, to ensure that they are treated fairly. And the third is about the conditions under which democracy is possible at all – specifically about when people will trust one another sufficiently for them to respect a democratic constitution, and be willing to discuss and decide issues in an atmosphere of mutual respect.

#### Freedom and the limits of government

There are two central questions that we need to ask. First, what exactly is the freedom we are talking about? What does it mean to say that someone is free to do this or that, or live in one way or another? Second, what are the limits of individual freedom? What should happen when my freedom comes into conflict with other political goals, including the freedom of everyone else? Is there a principled way to decide this?
 
Let us begin then with freedom itself, an elusive idea that has filled the pages of many books of political philosophy. As a first shot, let us say that a person’s freedom depends on the number of options open to her, and on her capacity to make a choice between them. Someone who has a choice between ten different jobs has greater freedom than someone who only has two to choose between. Of course the quality of the options matters too: you may think that having two good jobs to choose between gives you more freedom than having ten lousy ones, particularly if the lousy ones are all rather similar (street cleaner, office cleaner, toilet cleaner, etc.). So rather than ‘number of options’ we should perhaps say ‘extent of options’ where this takes into account both how different the options are, and how valuable they are. As to the second clause, ‘capacity to choose’, we need this because someone might be presented with options but for one reason or another not be able to exercise a genuine choice between them. For instance suppose someone offers you the choice of going to see one or other of two plays this evening, but only tells you their titles, neither of which means anything to you at all. You can pick a play at random, but you cannot choose in the sense of deciding which play you would most like to see. Or again suppose that someone is completely under her mother’s thumb and always does what mother suggests. She is offered various jobs, but invariably takes the one that her mother recommends. From one point of view she has the freedom to choose her employment, but from another point of view she hasn’t.
 
So we can say that freedom has an external and an internal aspect: it depends on whether the world is arranged in such a way that someone has many doors open to him, but it also depends on whether he is able to choose, genuinely, which door to pass through. But now we need to dig a bit deeper to see what it means for a door to be open, and what it means to make a genuine choice.

>The commonly held view that the more governments do, the less freedom people have, is therefore mistaken. Governments do sometimes restrict freedom, sometimes justifiably, sometimes not (seat-belt legislation, for example, restricts the freedom of car-users, but most people would agree that it is justified by the lives it saves). But at other times government action can increase freedom, by giving people options that they would not have otherwise because of the cost. We need to look at particular policies, to see whether in opening options up they are closing down other ones that are more important. Unfortunately much political rhetoric about ‘the free society’ never gets down to this level of detail. Political philosophers, who ask exactly what we mean when we say that a person is or is not free to pursue a particular option, can help us make better-informed and more nuanced judgements about the relationship between government and personal freedom.

>Government can do less directly about the internal aspect of freedom, a person’s capacity to make genuine choices among the options open to her. This is sometimes called ‘positive liberty’ as distinct from the ‘negative liberty’ of having options that are not blocked by external factors. These two kinds of liberty have been contrasted with each other, as they were by the political philosopher Isaiah Berlin in a famous lecture called ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’. Berlin wanted to highlight the dangers in ‘positive liberty’ which he believed could be used in such a way as to justify authoritarian or totalitarian regimes, like Stalin’s Soviet Union, which gave their subjects very little ‘negative liberty’. But I believe it is more fruitful to see them as complementary, and I gave examples earlier to suggest why we should be concerned about genuine choice as well as about the availability of options. But how are we to know when a choice is genuine? This is more difficult to decide.

> The question is whether Mill’s principle still makes sense against the background of a welfare state, funded by taxation, that is committed to providing everyone with a minimum level of income, education, health care, and housing. In this context, should people have enforceable social responsibilities both to contribute and to avoid becoming unnecessarily dependent on welfare services?

>Freedom, then, is a very important political value, but not of such importance that it should set absolute limits to the exercise of political authority. In a democracy, especially, questions about the use of resources to promote freedom, about freedom and social responsibility, and about the rights that all citizens should enjoy, will be openly debated, and in answering them people will appeal to many different principles – to equality, to fairness, to the common good, to respect for nature, to the protection of culture, and so forth. As these debates proceed, certain freedoms will be picked out and enshrined as basic rights, perhaps in a written constitution. But this is never the final word: as societies change, as new needs and new problems arise, so too will the shape of freedom itself. Who could have imagined, even 20 years ago, that internet access, electronic surveillance, or gene ownership would very soon assume centre stage in debates about individual liberty? Who can predict which new issues will have taken their place in 20 years’ time?
